---
id: "consistent-measurement-of-paid-and-unpaid-working-activities"
name: "Promotion of consistent measurement of paid and unpaid working activities"
round: 1
description: The overall aim of the work is the development of guidance on methods to achieve consistency in measurement of working activities across different household surveys through collaborative work between agencies.
members: []
activities: []
outputs: []
---

## Background and ILO Guidance development

In October 2013 the 19th International Conference of Labour Statisticians (ICLS) adopted benchmark new standards through a [Resolution concerning statistics of work, employment and labour underutilization](https://www.ilo.org/global/statistics-and-databases/meetings-and-events/international-conference-oflabour-statisticians/19/WCMS_230304/lang--en/index.htm). These standards established a new forms of work framework and related definitions which distinguished different working activities, including work for pay or profit (employment), work to produce goods or services for own-use (own-use production work) and other forms of unpaid work. In addition a set of labour underutilization indicators were defined to supplement the unemployment rate. In combination, these standards alter and widen substantially the existing framework for labour market related statistics that centered on standards agreed at the 13th ICLS in 1982.

Since late 2014 the ILO has been engaged in a process to generate guidance and tools to support countries to implement household surveys to measure work related issues in line with latest standards and good practices. Initially the ILO work centred on gathering evidence, through pilot testing in countries, to generate guidance. The evidence was in turn used to generate tools to support countries in Labour Force Survey (LFS) implementation. The tools and related resources can be found at a [dedicated website](https://ilo.org/lfsresources/).

## Collaborative work

The guidance and tools generated by the ILO primarily focus on the Labour Force Survey (LFS). However, measurement of labour related issues does also take place through other household surveys creating a demand for guidance which extends beyond the LFS.

To meet this demand the ILO has been engaged with other international agencies who support household survey programmes through which labour is measured, in particular through the Women's Work and Employment Partnership \(WWEP\) hosted by [Data2x](https://data2x.org/). The initial phase of this partnership was used to share knowledge and experiences between three agencies, namely the ILO, World Bank and Food and Agriculture Organization, each of whom was independently undertaking tests to implement the latest standards in the household surveys they support.

During the latest phase of the WWEP the ILO and the World Bank worked together to enable a more direct comparison of outcomes in the different surveys they support \(LFS and Living Standards Measurement Survey respectively\) towards the generation of guidance on implementation of the standards in different types of household surveys. While the surveys fulfil very different primary objectives \(for example generation of labour market indicators versus poverty measurement and analysis\) and have substantially different structures and content, it is nonetheless important that key concepts be implemented in a consistent way, even if with different levels of detail. This work took the form of a joint pilot study in Sri Lanka, which was completed in October 2019, the results of which will be used to generate the guidance.

In addition to generating valuable evidence to inform guidance the joint work and WWEP more widely has contributed to important objective of improved institutional collaboration, which has already been of benefit to all agencies involved and set the basis for close future collaboration.

Ongoing planning activities for future work focus on developing data collection strategies to improve measurement of own-use provision of services, in particular, unpaid care and domestic work, through time-use methods suitable for integration with LFS, as well as new approaches to improve measurement of informal market-oriented activities at household level.
